PAGE 1

BASIC HINDI ] 125 Reading Hindi English दरवाजको घटी बजती हऔर ऋतकि दरवाजा खोलता है| Door bell rings and Hritik opens the door. किः Ohol It is Vidya. Hello, how are Hello, All is well How are you ? किः मँभी ठीक हूँ| आओ, अन्दर आओ Lam okay too. come, come inside या Thanks, Your home is very beautiful. किः Thanks, Let s go, [ will show yOu my whole house. याः Let s go. This is the door of our house. After that there is a corridor. After the corridor, there is another doot. After that door, there is our living room. On the किः कोबायी तरफ हमारो रसोई, और खानका कमरा हौl बठैक कोदायों lett sicle of the Toom, there is Our kitchen atd dinning room. On the right side of the living room, तरफ, पढनका कमरा, पूजा घर, और अतथी का कमरा भो हौँ बठैक मोें there is a study room, worship room, and a guest ही, एक सोढी़ हैl room too. In the toom itself there is a staitcase. याः tloor ? On the top floor, there are three bedrooms. In each किः शौचालय और स्नानघर हैl ऊपर को मंजलि पर, एक छज्जा भो हौ room, there is a toilet and shower. There is a balcony too on the top floor. याः कया नीचकी मजलि पर कोई शौचालय नहों ह? Ls there no toilet on the bottom floor ! किः There is OnE toilet ana shower at tne bottom floor too. ऋतकि , तम्हारा घर बहृत अच्छा , साफ और हवादार भी हौl क्या Hritik, your house is very good, clean and TLL . याः Is there any garden in your house ? ङि Behind the house, there is a small gardem. This is पसंदीदा जगह हैl my mother s favorite place. याः 0 waol ], too, like garden a lot. And where is your room! किः room is on the top floor. Right now , my room is dirty. [ will show you my room later याः ठोक हैl YOu! शक्रया Okay living living toP airy Okay

PAGE 2

Oblique Case Video Instructor Video: Oblique Case Case is a property of a word which indicates its uses within a phrase or a sentence. In Hindi, based on form, there are two types of caseः (a) Direct case, and (b) Oblique a) Direct Case: The direct case is used with a nominal phrase is not followed by a post position. b) Oblique Case: The oblique case is used with a nominal phrase is followed by a post position. Nouns, pronouns, adjectives and verbs change in oblique case form when followed by a post- position Note: Please note that when a nouns, pronouns, adjectives and verbs are in oblique case form, do not change their meanings. lt is just a grammatical form which has nothing to do with the meaning of those words. This is why typically Hindi learners struggle to acquire this very crucial but meaningless feature of Hindi language Oblique Noun Masculine Singular Oblique Nouns Only singular masculine nouns that ends in आ changes into ए in oblique case form. Others (singular masculine that does not end in आ and singular femininel do not change. For Examples: लडका लडक का नाम (आ changes into ए आदमी आदमी का नाम " man s name" (No change Feminine Singular Oblique Nouns When a feminine singular noun is followed by any post position, it does not change its form. For Examples: लडको लडको का नाम 5 name " (No change) कत्तिाब कतिाब का नाम "Book s (No change) 149 they girl'= name"

PAGE 3

Plural Oblique Nouns All plural nouns masculine and feminine) change into ओं or यों in their oblique case forms. For Examples: ! लडक लडको कनाम शहर शहरों केनाम "Cities लडकयिाँ लडकयों केनाम "Girls names कतिाब - कतिाबो कनाम "books name" Oblique Nouns Summary Feminine Singular Type l Type [ Type II changes in -ए No change No change No change लडका लडऊ का घर -घरङ लडकी - लडको को रतान मकान " मकान मो खडिको - पडिकी पर मज - मज पर Plural Trpe [ ]l Tpe ] II All masculine and feminine plural nouns change into ओं or यों लडको - लडको को घर-घरोंका मक्ान - मकानोम खडिकयां - बडिकयो पर मजं मंजोंपर Oblique Adjectives As we know Hindi adjectives can be classified into marked and unmarked adjectives. Marked adjective (that ends in आ) changes in ए for oblique adjective form. For Examples: मोठा मीठा फल Unmarked adjective (that does not end in आ ) does not change in oblique adjective form. For Examples: (No change) हवादार हवादार कमरा - हवादार कमरेम In a room " No change) "Boys Tpe Tpe Trpe boy good girl= airy